What if we could make our body’s old or sick cells act young
again? Surprisingly, the bacteria that cause leprosy may
show us how. Previously, we discovered that infecting cells
with leprosy bacteria in a laboratory dish “reprogrammed”
the cells back to an immature state. The cells may then be
able to produce many different types of cells in the body –
and maybe even regenerate an organ.
To test this in an actual animal, we infected nine-banded
armadillos with leprosy bacteria. We compared their livers to
the livers of uninfected armadillos. The livers of armadillos
infected with leprosy were larger than those of uninfected
armadillos. Importantly, these larger livers were healthy,
with no signs of damage. We performed genetic analyses
on the liver cells to determine which genes were active. Our
results show that leprosy infection “reprograms” adult liver
cells to make them resemble immature liver cells. Maybe
someday we can adapt this natural process to regrow aging
and damaged livers in humans. 

Sometimes people need a new organ because disease or
injury has damaged one of theirs. Unfortunately, waiting for
a transplant organ from an appropriate donor can take a
really long time. Imagine needing a new heart but having
to wait for years! What if they could just grow a new organ
instead?
Scientists are interested in learning how to regenerate
organs for people. They have tried different techniques in
the laboratory to encourage organs to grow back. However,
there are major safety concerns. These approaches often
cause scars or tumor growth.
Previously, we made a surprising discovery. We infected
nerve cells from adult mice with the bacteria that causes
leprosy (Fig. 1). Leprosy is a contagious disease that affects
the nerves, skin, eyes, and nose. The bacteria caused the
cells to return to a more immature state – instead of looking
like adult nerve cells, they looked more like stem cells.
Stem cells are immature cells that don’t have a specific role
in the body yet. When an organism is forming, these cells
can become any type of cell needed for a given organ. Some
stem cells are also present in adult organs. Usually, they are
inactive. When they sense damage to tissues, they activate
to repair it. But as we get older, our stem cells have a harder
time repairing our organs.

Turning adult cells into stem cells could be a way to build
a new, functioning organ or make an older organ young
again. That’s exciting! But those previous experiments with
leprosy bacteria were on mouse cells in a laboratory dish.
We wondered if the same process would occur in an actual
living animal.

We chose to look at leprosy infection in nine-banded
armadillos. Armadillos are mammals native to the southwest
U.S.
We focused on potential regeneration of the liver. This
organ has many functions, including removing toxins from
the body’s blood supply and maintaining healthy blood sugar
levels. Unfortunately, the liver is also a target for bacterial
growth. The liver has an astonishing ability to regenerate on
its own in healthy people. However, we do not know how to
trigger liver renewal in patients who need it most – those with 
liver disease or injury.
We infected armadillos with the leprosy bacteria. After 10–30
months of infection, we removed their livers and compared
them to livers from uninfected armadillos. We looked at
the liver cells under high-powered microscopes. We also
performed analyses on the cells’ DNA to identify which genes
were active. We wanted to see if the pattern of gene activity
in the cells looked more like adult liver cells or immature stem
cells.

We calculated the ratio of each armadillo’s liver to its total
body weight. We found that the livers of armadillos infected
with leprosy bacteria were about 50% larger than those of
uninfected armadillos (Fig. 2).
Even though the infected livers had grown, they were
otherwise normal. Infected livers had the same anatomy
as uninfected livers. Importantly, the enlarged livers were
healthy and functional! They showed no signs of scarring or
tumor growth.

Next, we measured gene activity in infected and uninfected
livers. We found several signs that the liver cells of infected
armadillos were “reprogrammed” to act like stem cells. The
gene activity patterns of infected liver cells were similar to
those of younger animals’ livers and developing human livers.
In infected armadillos, genes associated with growth and
development became active. Some of these genes are usually
active when the liver is forming in a developing organism. At the
same time, genes associated with aging were suppressed.

Our results suggest that leprosy bacteria “reprogram” liver
cells and return them to a stem cell–like or more “youthful”
state. Once in this state, the cells can encourage new liver
cells to mature and grow new liver tissue. This leads to liver
growth.
We think that the bacteria take advantage of the natural
regenerative ability of the liver to increase the organ’s size.
This gives the bacteria more cells to infect.

We cannot say for sure if these findings would work in human
livers. And we are not about to infect any people with leprosy
bacteria! But figuring out how armadillos’ livers keep growing
under the influence of leprosy bacteria – without forming
scars or tumors – might help scientists better understand
the mechanisms of regeneration in the human liver. If we
could harness this ability, we might someday be able to help
people with liver disease regenerate healthy livers.

Leprosy has affected people since ancient times. Today, the
disease is rare in many places, including the United States.
However, it still occurs in more than 120 countries. Currently,
about 208,000 people worldwide are infected with leprosy
every year, most of them in Brazil, Africa and Asia.
Fortunately, you don’t have to worry too much about
catching it. Leprosy is not very contagious – social distancing 
is enough to stop its spread from person to person. Plus,
most people have natural immunity to it.
If leprosy is treated early, it is curable. Still, you shouldn’t
handle any wild armadillos! Wild animals of any kind may
carry diseases that can spread to humans. 
